(upbeat music)
We're gonna talk about
dynamically creating pages.
So every single one of these pizzas, Pear Necessities,
Veggie Delight, Cluck Norris, all of these,
when you click on one of them,
it goes to /pizza, forward slash whatever the slug is.
Now, if we wanna create a new page for every single pizza,
does that mean we have to go into our pages folder here
and create a new folder called pizzas?
And then every single pizza has its own file?
No, that doesn't make sense.
Cause like then how would somebody log into your sanity,
create a pizza and expect it to show up on the page?
So now we're gonna look at how we can programmatically
create pages with the Gatsby node file.
So let's crack open our Gatsby-
No, we don't even have that file yet.
Okay. So we've got all these,
we've got Gatsby browser, which we wrap it.
We have Gatsby SSR, which is essentially the same thing,
but happens when the pages are generated rather than
after the page is loaded.
And then finally we have Gatsby-node and I have
the docs open here and it gives plugins and site builders,
site builders, that's us,
APIs for controlling your site's data in the graph QL layer.
So that's cool.
So we're gonna go ahead and make one of those.
It's called Gatsby-node.js and just like all the other
Gatsby-whatever files we're able to hook in
to different points of Gatsby build cycle
and do things like dynamically create pages.
So we're going to be hooking into the create pages hook.
It says this extension point, I call it a hook.
It's called an extension point.
It's called after the initial sourcing of data.
So that's after all of the sanity data has been
pulled into our graph QL API so that you can query data
in order to create pages.
That's exactly what we wanna do.
We wanna be able to query our pizzas
and create each of those pages.
So, what we'll do here is we will export a function called
create pages.
'Cause this is a specific function name,
that's from the API.
And then we also have to make that in a sync function.
And then inside of here,
let's just console log creating pages.
Let's put a bunch in there just so we can see it.
Now, what I want you to do is go back to your Gatsby build,
kill it, and let's start it up again.
And we'll see, as this thing runs, it's going to note that,
oh, there's a create pages entry point.
I'm going to run whatever code is in there.
So give it a sec. See, how it's sourcing data from sanity.
Once sanity, there you go, look at that.
There's your dinner.
You get all the, you get the hook right into,
after the sanity data has been done
before it actually goes ahead and builds the website.
So that's exactly what we wanna do right there.
They pass you a set of params here,
that if we take a look here, create pages,
they give you a graph QL,
they give you some actions in the graph Qls
used for querying data
actions are used for actually manually creating pages.
So what we wanna do here is to create a page for ourselves.
Now we're going to be doing create pages dynamically.
We wanna create, we've got, we've three different kinds.
We have the pizzas, we've got the toppings
and we have the slice masters.
So all three of these pieces of content
needed to be dynamically created.
So rather than just stuff them all into here,
what I'd like to do is make another function and simply just
await it inside of here.
So we're going to make a new function here.
That's called turn pizzas into pages
and that will take params, oh, this should have an S on it.
And that also should be in a sync function.
And there's a couple of things we're gonna do,
One, get a template for this page.
'Cause we still need to write some JSX and template it out
two, we need to query all pizzas,
three, loop over each pizza
and create a page for that pizza.
All right. So let's go ahead and do that.
So first thing we need to do is we're going to create
a template for this page.
Now this is the same idea as a pages page,
but because it's not a route we're going to stick them.
You can stick them in the components folder.
I like to create a new folder called templates.
Oh, oh, it already exists.
It's in there. Okay.
It's already in there and we will call that,
what do we call that?
And we will call that capital P pizza.JS.
You may be asking Wes,
why does that pizza have a capital
where all your other pages don't have capitals on them?
Well, to me, this is a template
that can be reused multiple times.
And if something can be reuse multiple times,
it is a class and it should have a capital on it
because every single instance will be lower case P pizza.
So that's kinda why I put a capital in there.
Does it matter? No, absolutely not.
But that's just kinda how I like to go about it.
Now in here,
we are going to export default pizza page
or maybe call it single pizza page
and then let's just return P
and let's just return P single pizza.
Then we'll go into here and get the template for that page.
Okay. So I'll say const,
pizza template is equal to,
now we need to use some node APIs to resolve this file.
So we need to import
import path from path. That's a node API.
We did an npm install that just comes from node directly.
And then here we say, path.resolve,
and we give it a relative path.
So into the source directory,
into our templates directory and pizza.JS.
Make sure you put the .JS on there.
'cause it's not an import it's just a,
a file path resolution.
Next, what we need to do is query all the pizzas.
Okay. So in this params comes two things
that's pretty common.
It's pretty common to destructure the params
into graph QL and actions.
We're actually gonna go ahead and do that ourselves.
So we'll say graph QL and actions,
and then let's actually go down into this create pages
and call it ourselves.
So we will await turn pizzas into pages
and just pass it to params.
And the reason why we call await in front of it
is 'cause this is in a sync function.
'Cause it will take couple seconds,
maybe even up to several seconds
in order to query all that data and create the pages for us.
So it is an a sync function that we await.
Otherwise this will run before it's done creating
and we won't have our pages.
So query all the pages we'll say const,
curly brackets data,
we're gonna destructure the data right off the bat,
and we will await graph QL.
Now this is a little bit different, right?
Like previously, when we did our single pages,
there was no await
and it was just graph QL tag template literal.
When you're using the node API,
it's a little bit different because it's asynchronous.
So we need to put the await keyword in front of it
and graph QL is a function.
It means you don't get the highlighting in here,
which has a bit of a bummer.
There's some tricks around it,
but we're just gonna bite and chew on that.
We'll go ahead and write our query.
This is the regular queries that we have.
So all sanity Pizza,
and let's just rename that pizzas right off the bat
as for our nodes and for each node,
we want the name and the slug, which has the current.
So really that that's all we need here.
We don't need the toppings or the description
or anything else about this pizza,
because that will be queried inside of this page.
We just need enough to actually render out the template.
And then the template itself,
will go off and fetch the rest of the data that we want.
All right. So I think, I think we've written enough code.
Let's make sure this is working.
We'll console.log all of this data here
and we'll go back and you have to kill the build
every single time that you make a change to Gatsby node.
So go ahead and rerun it.
And, oh, this is the,
I guess the downside to just console log indirectly
in your terminal is,
you can't actually open up these things,
but we can tell that there are pizzas showing up one pizza
for everyone in our sanity database.
So that's good.
And that allows us to now go into step three,
which is loop over each pizza
and create a page for that pizza.
So we will take our data and .pizzas.
I think it's data.pizzas. Is that right?
Yeah. You can tell it's right here dot for each,
now this is not a map
because we're not returning anything from this.
We're simply just going off and doing some data and the,
the create page I've function that we're gonna use
I believe is synchronous.
So there's no for of needed here
for each will work just great.
So for each pizza,
and then let's just console log,
creating a page for pizza.name.
Let's kill the build, try running it again.
I did this a lot because like
you can get kinda lost in this file.
And if you just like take a couple extra minutes
and kill the build and restart it
just to double-check that every single step is working,
then you're in a bit of a better space.
Oh, I've a little bit of an error here,
so good thing I did that.
Dated.pizzas.for each is not a function.
Oh, you know why?
'Cause it's dated.pizzas.nodes.
Did I say peaches?
Pizzas. Let's try that again.
Here we go.
I'm creating a page for Pear Necessities,
Cluck Norris, Here Comes Truffle, The Bee Sting,
Dough Exotic, you get the point, right?
So good. We've we've created our data.
We're looping over it.
The last step is we need to create a page for that pizza.
So that's what we do is we take actions.
Now actions has been passed in right here to the thing,
and that was initially in the create pages params.
And then on actions, there is a create page function.
So not create pages, that's the hook into it.
But the create page is the actual method
that we use to create it.
And then that takes a number of different params.
So we say the path is, so what is the URL?
Let's say, what is the URL for this new page?
So the path is gonna be pizza/
now we'll take the pizza.slug.current.
Then we also need component.
And that will be the pizza template.
So remember we did this,
you could also just take the path that resolve
and put that right here if you wanted to.
But I like to do it this way.
Let's pause there and make sure that's still working.
And then we'll get into this, the third part,
which is context.
So kill it, start it up again.
Get a bit of an error here.
Generating development field, unexpected semi.
Oh, you know what I did?
I forgot the word.
There's so many words you've got to put in here.
Sometimes you forget a word. All right.
Let's see if that..
I believe we need to kill it again and restart.
Here we go. Now it's up and running.
Ooh, that's cool.
The development process needs to be restarted
for changes to Gatsby node to people.
Okay. So look at that,
like remember I was telling you kill the build.
It looks like Gatsby now,
will prompt you on your actual website
and it will kill the build for you, which is pretty cool.
I don't need that right now.
So we'll just go ahead and go back to our homepage,
go to our pizza menu and click on one of our pizzas.
And it doesn't work because I forgot to import React,
import React from React.
There we go.
That's our single pizza being rendered out for the...
If we go back to the Pizza menu,
click on a random Nacho Average Pizza, single pizza.
Now what is really cool about that is if we can inspect it,
go to our components here and let's search for what was that
single pizza page, here we go.
You see the props of that page.
You have the location
and then we have this thing called page context.
There's nothing in there.
Now, if you need to pass some data
from this create page method to the actual template,
that can be done via context.
So I go into here and we'll say context.
And I'll give a curly bracket and say, Wes is cool.
And let's say slug is pizza.slug.current.
And let's just try that.
All right. Let's try this.
Okay.
That's cool. So now it restarts it for you.
I think that's changed as started recording this course,
which is pretty nifty.
Gatsby is restarting the development server.
All right. So that restarted.
Now we still see our single pizzas page here
and open that up, page context.
We have our slug, Nacho Average Pizza
as well as Wes is cool.
So you could have also pulled that information from the URL,
but this is the proper way to do it
is pass it via page context.
There also you'll see there's path contexts.
It looks like the same thing.
I believe that is the old deprecated one.
And we use page contexts now.
All right.
So now we can just go to our pizza.JS and just,
just use it as if it were a regular query.
So we can export const query is equal to graph QL,
go ahead and import graph QL from Gatsby.
And we have a query.
Now this is where we start to interpolate variables
into our query.
So normally we would say query,
our pizza is equal to sanity pizza.
And for that pizza, we want the name and the ID.
Let's just start at that.
We need a lot more than that, but let's just start at that.
So this needs to be dynamic, right?
This needs to be dynamic based on the slug passed in
via context in Gatsby node.
Okay.
So like how do we get, how do we get that into here?
Well, this is a graph QL query
and actually has access
to all of our page context variables directly.
So the first thing we do is we set up our query
to expect to take an argument.
So we'll say dollar sign slug.
And because this is graph QL, you always have to type it,
meaning that you can't just say,
I expect them to pass me a slug.
You have to say, I expect them to pass me a slug
that is a type of string
and the bang on the end means it's absolutely required.
So if somebody tries to run this template without the slug,
it will break because you can't view this page
without passing it a slug.
Okay. So that sets up our query to accept it.
Then we need to hot potato that parameter
over to the sanity pizza.
Remember if we go to our graph QL here and we write a query,
pa pa pa pa pap
and we'll say a sanity pizza.
So this is a single pizza,
and we want to grab a single pizza where the slug
is equal to,
what's this one right here,
Nacho Average Pizza.
And then for that, we want the name.
Let's go ahead and run that, run.
PQ is not defined.
Why not? By type slugs sanity.
Oh, I see. It's because it's not just slug.
It's slug.current.
So if you wanna like,
do it a little bit deeper than that,
we've got to bring this back a little.
So we've got the slug, current is equal to
Nacho Average Pizza and there we go.
We turned the thing and if we want,
we could grab the toppings and the name of each topping
that's on that and run it, right?
So this part that needs to be dynamic, right?
So we'll go back to our pizza JS here
and we'll modify this to say,
we wanna grab the sanity pizza where the slug, current,
that current is because it's slug.current,
is equal to, and we can hardcode this
like Nacho Average Pizza,
but we don't want it to be that for every single one.
It needs to be based on our variable.
And that's where we pass in slug, like that, okay?
And you may be saying like
where's slug coming from in the first place?
Well, that is this slug, right?
You could pass in anything you want here.
We don't need Wes is cool. You can take that out.
All right, now, if we go to our page here
and take a look at our data pizza, and there it is.
Now, if we go to another page and checkout Cluck Norris
and look for our single pizza page,
we should see a different pizza.
There we go. Cluck Norris, different pizza showing up.
That is awesome.
So some people, and you may be saying like, Wes,
Wes, Wes, why don't we just query the entire pizza
right here and pass the entire pizza via context,
and then just skip the whole query here entirely.
And that is perfectly valid.
So if you want to, you can just do the entire query
in your Gatsby node,
but because all of your pages have to work like this.
I'd rather just keep the actual query
in the actual page itself.
That way, if I'm working on the page,
I can quickly modify the query
without having to jump back into my Gatsby node.
But that is certainly an option and just live your life,
if that's the way you would like to do it.
So we wanna grab all of the data for our pizza.
We have the name, the ID,
we're gonna grab the image, asset, fluid.
Now we want a larger version of it,
so we just say, we want a max width of 800.
Remember we just resized an image there.
And then we want the same dot, dot, dot Gatsby,
sanity, image, fluid.
Then for, this is too many curly brackets,
I like to highlight the one
and then click beside it and go underneath.
We want the toppings and for each topping with the name,
the ID and whether it's vegetarian or not.
And I believe, see,
oh that's also a nice benefit of doing the query directly
inside of your template.
See, I just, I just hit save there,
and the data immediately updated itself.
If you wrote your entire query in Gatsby node,
you'd have to kill the process and start it again.
And that feedback cycle is slow.
Especially once you get into, like, I don't know,
like my own personal website,
sometimes it takes a couple minutes to get going
and that's brutal.
That's really slow for me.
So I rather do it in here where it's hot reloaded
and the data is fetched on demand.
Right, now we're at a point where we just need to display
all this data and write a little bit of CSS.
That's in the next video.
Although maybe I'm gonna encourage you
to try to do this one yourself, and then,
then look back at my answer or follow along after,
because we're at a point now where you should be,
feel comfortable given the data.
You should be able to template it out and make it look
however it is that you want on the page.